src/main/asciidoc/analyze.adoc, before:

:linkattrs:

[[Analyze]]

== Analyze

image::analyze.jpg["analyze-phase", title="Analyze-Phase"]

=== Goals

. Obtain overview of intent, purpose and quality requirements of the system (<<System>>).

. Develop and document an understanding of internal structures, concepts and architectural approaches.

. Find all problems, issues, symptoms, risks or technical debt within the system (<<System>>), its operation, maintenance or otherwise related processes.

. Understand root causes of the problems found, potential interdependencies between issues


=== How it works

Systematically look for such issues at various places and with various people.

TIP: To effectively find issues, you need an appropriate amount of _understanding_ of the system under design (<<System>>), its technical concepts, code-structure, inner workings, major external interfaces and its development process. 


// internal comment:
// the following imageMap + image reference has to be manually maintained
// from the original OmniGraffle file!
// please note the usemap-attribute name - which is WRONG in the original graffle export!


[[figure-analyze-pattern-overview]]
++++
<img border=0 src="images/analyze-patterns-overview.png" usemap="#AnalysisOverview" alt="analyze-patterns overview">
<map name="AnalysisOverview">
	<area shape=rect coords="262,281,366,340" href="#Development-Process-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="457,118,576,178" href="#Collect-Improvement-Opportunities">
	<area shape=rect coords="194,401,291,450" href="#Collect-Issues">
	<area shape=rect coords="3,301,126,350" href="#Quantitative-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="263,141,382,190" href="#Stakeholder-Interview">
	<area shape=rect coords="3,164,122,212" href="#Stakeholder-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="58,2,151,51" href="#Context-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="463,272,576,321" href="#Qualitative-Analysis">
</map>
++++
Figure: Overview of Most Important Analysis Pracices


Always begin with <<Stakeholder-Analysis>>, then conduct <<Stakeholder-Interview>> with important stakeholders.

Improve your <<Architectural-Understanding>> of the <<System>> by 

  ** <<Context-Analysis>>
  ** <<Documentation-Analysis>>, read especially the architecture documentation, focus on <<View-Based-Understanding>>.
  ** <<Development-Process-Analysis>> 
  ** Perform <<Static-Code-Analysis>> to learn about code structure _in-the-large_. This also helps to identify risky code.

* <<Capture-Quality-Requirements>> from the _authoritative_ stakeholders of the systems.
* Conduct a <<Qualitative-Analysis>> of the system, its architecture and associated organization, 
based upon the specific quality requirements
  ** Inspect and analyze all involved organizational processes -
    (development, project-management, operations, requirements-analysis)
* Perform <<Runtime-Analysis>> or <<Quantitative-Analysis>>, e.g. performance and load monitoring, process and thread analysis
  ** Inspect the data created, modified and queried by the system, for structure, size, volume or specialities

Finally, do <<Root-Cause-Analysis>> of major issues found together with appropriate stakeholders. 

WARNING: Never start solving problems until you have a thorough understanding of current stakeholder requirements. Otherwise you risk wasting effort in areas which no influential stakeholder cares about.




=== Patterns and Practices for Analysis

++++
<img border=0 src="images/analyze-patterns-conceptmap.png" usemap="#AnalysisPatterns" alt="Analyze Patterns">
<map name="AnalysisPatterns">
	<area shape=rect coords="93,690,175,729" href="#Instrument-System">
	<area shape=rect coords="196,590,299,629" href="#Infrastructure-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="294,319,398,379" href="#Development-Process-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="610,97,729,156" href="#Collect-Improvement-Opportunities">
	<area shape=rect coords="305,508,402,557" href="#Collect-Issues">
	<area shape=rect coords="28,803,125,852" href="#Static-Code-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="358,690,449,739" href="#Software-Archeology">
	<area shape=rect coords="449,25,553,64" href="#Questionnaire">
	<area shape=rect coords="15,294,150,343" href="#Quantitative-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="649,332,756,381" href="#Requirements-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="330,141,449,190" href="#Stakeholder-Interview">
	<area shape=rect coords="40,167,159,215" href="#Stakeholde-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="66,494,150,539" href="#Runtime-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="543,253,664,301" href="#Documentation-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="145,433,210,472" href="#Data-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="455,562,567,611" href="#Issue-Tracker-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="124,2,218,51" href="#Context-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="654,526,729,565" href="#ATAM">
	<area shape=rect coords="484,386,597,435" href="#Qualitative-Analysis">
</map>

++++
Figure: Detailed overview of Analysis Practices and Patterns


// internal comment:
// the prior imageMap + image reference has to be manually maintained
// from the original OmniGraffle file!
// please note the usemap-attribute name - which is WRONG in the original graffle export!




include::patterns/analyze/atam.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/capture-quality-requirements.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/context-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/data-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/debugging.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/development-process-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/documentation-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/infrastructure-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/instrument-system.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/issue-tracker-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/organizational-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/qualitative-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/quantitative-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/pre-interview-questionnaire.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/questionnaire.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/requirements-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/root-cause-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/runtime-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/software-archeology.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/stakeholder-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/stakeholder-interview.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/static-code-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/take-what-they-mean.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/view-based-understanding.adoc[]

Commit message:

added the "microscope analogy" to analyze

src/main/asciidoc/analyze.adoc, after:

:linkattrs:

[[Analyze]]

== Analyze

image::analyze.jpg["analyze-phase", title="Analyze-Phase"]

=== Goals

. Obtain overview of intent, purpose and quality requirements of the system (<<System>>).

. Develop and document an understanding of internal structures, concepts and architectural approaches.

. Find all problems, issues, symptoms, risks or technical debt within the system (<<System>>), its operation, maintenance or otherwise related processes.

. Understand root causes of the problems found, potential interdependencies between issues


=== How it works

Systematically look for such issues at various places and with various people.

TIP: To effectively find issues, you need an appropriate amount of _understanding_ of the system under design (<<System>>), its technical concepts, code-structure, inner workings, major external interfaces and its development process. 

One serious risk in this phase is a premature restriction to certain artifacts or aspects of the system: If you search with a microscope, you're likely to miss several aspects.


// internal comment:
// the following imageMap + image reference has to be manually maintained
// from the original OmniGraffle file!
// please note the usemap-attribute name - which is WRONG in the original graffle export!


[[figure-analyze-pattern-overview]]
++++
<img border=0 src="images/analyze-patterns-overview.png" usemap="#AnalysisOverview" alt="analyze-patterns overview">
<map name="AnalysisOverview">
	<area shape=rect coords="262,281,366,340" href="#Development-Process-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="457,118,576,178" href="#Collect-Improvement-Opportunities">
	<area shape=rect coords="194,401,291,450" href="#Collect-Issues">
	<area shape=rect coords="3,301,126,350" href="#Quantitative-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="263,141,382,190" href="#Stakeholder-Interview">
	<area shape=rect coords="3,164,122,212" href="#Stakeholder-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="58,2,151,51" href="#Context-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="463,272,576,321" href="#Qualitative-Analysis">
</map>
++++
Figure: Overview of Most Important Analysis Pracices


Always begin with <<Stakeholder-Analysis>>, then conduct <<Stakeholder-Interview>> with important stakeholders.

Improve your <<Architectural-Understanding>> of the <<System>> by 

  ** <<Context-Analysis>>
  ** <<Documentation-Analysis>>, read especially the architecture documentation, focus on <<View-Based-Understanding>>.
  ** <<Development-Process-Analysis>> 
  ** Perform <<Static-Code-Analysis>> to learn about code structure _in-the-large_. This also helps to identify risky code.

* <<Capture-Quality-Requirements>> from the _authoritative_ stakeholders of the systems.
* Conduct a <<Qualitative-Analysis>> of the system, its architecture and associated organization, 
based upon the specific quality requirements
  ** Inspect and analyze all involved organizational processes -
    (development, project-management, operations, requirements-analysis)
* Perform <<Runtime-Analysis>> or <<Quantitative-Analysis>>, e.g. performance and load monitoring, process and thread analysis
  ** Inspect the data created, modified and queried by the system, for structure, size, volume or specialities

Finally, do <<Root-Cause-Analysis>> of major issues found together with appropriate stakeholders. 

WARNING: Never start solving problems until you have a thorough understanding of current stakeholder requirements. Otherwise you risk wasting effort in areas which no influential stakeholder cares about.




=== Patterns and Practices for Analysis

++++
<img border=0 src="images/analyze-patterns-conceptmap.png" usemap="#AnalysisPatterns" alt="Analyze Patterns">
<map name="AnalysisPatterns">
	<area shape=rect coords="93,690,175,729" href="#Instrument-System">
	<area shape=rect coords="196,590,299,629" href="#Infrastructure-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="294,319,398,379" href="#Development-Process-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="610,97,729,156" href="#Collect-Improvement-Opportunities">
	<area shape=rect coords="305,508,402,557" href="#Collect-Issues">
	<area shape=rect coords="28,803,125,852" href="#Static-Code-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="358,690,449,739" href="#Software-Archeology">
	<area shape=rect coords="449,25,553,64" href="#Questionnaire">
	<area shape=rect coords="15,294,150,343" href="#Quantitative-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="649,332,756,381" href="#Requirements-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="330,141,449,190" href="#Stakeholder-Interview">
	<area shape=rect coords="40,167,159,215" href="#Stakeholde-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="66,494,150,539" href="#Runtime-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="543,253,664,301" href="#Documentation-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="145,433,210,472" href="#Data-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="455,562,567,611" href="#Issue-Tracker-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="124,2,218,51" href="#Context-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="654,526,729,565" href="#ATAM">
	<area shape=rect coords="484,386,597,435" href="#Qualitative-Analysis">
</map>

++++
Figure: Detailed overview of Analysis Practices and Patterns


// internal comment:
// the prior imageMap + image reference has to be manually maintained
// from the original OmniGraffle file!
// please note the usemap-attribute name - which is WRONG in the original graffle export!




include::patterns/analyze/atam.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/capture-quality-requirements.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/context-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/data-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/debugging.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/development-process-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/documentation-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/infrastructure-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/instrument-system.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/issue-tracker-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/organizational-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/qualitative-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/quantitative-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/pre-interview-questionnaire.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/questionnaire.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/requirements-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/root-cause-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/runtime-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/software-archeology.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/stakeholder-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/stakeholder-interview.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/static-code-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/take-what-they-mean.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/view-based-understanding.adoc[]
