src/main/asciidoc/crosscutting.adoc, before:

:linkattrs:

[[Crosscutting]]
== Cross-Cutting Practices and Patterns

image::01-intro-and-overview/crosscutting-phase.png["", title="Crosscutting-Phase"]

=== Goals

to be done.

=== Overview

// image map - created manually from OmniGraffle Export
++++
<map name="CrosscuttingPracticesOverview">
	<area shape=rect coords="341,3,478,50" href="#Architectural-Understanding">
	<area shape=poly coords="218,378,329,378,338,382,338,380,342,384,342,382,347,386,347,440,338,445,226,445,218,442,213,440,209,436,209,382,218,378" href="#Issue-List">
	<area shape=poly coords="517,376,641,376,651,381,651,379,655,383,655,381,660,385,660,440,651,445,526,445,517,442,512,440,507,436,507,381,517,376" href="#Improvement-Backlog">
	<area shape=rect coords="3,305,130,352" href="#Explicit-Assumption">
	<area shape=rect coords="501,167,669,235" href="#Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement">
	<area shape=rect coords="218,181,321,235" href="#Collect-Issues">
</map>

<img border=0 src="images/crosscutting-patterns-overview.png"
usemap="#CrosscuttingPracticesOverview">
++++

=== How it works

. Start with collecting issues - mainly in <<Analyze>> phase. Based upon your findings here, maintain an <<Issue-List>>

. Evaluate those, determine _values_, preferably cost. This ensures you later solve _important_ and _relevant_ issues.

. <<Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement>> and evaluate those too.

. Align issues and potential improvements, <<Plan-Improvements>>

. Continously strive to increase your <<Architectural-Understanding>>, as this
  facilitates identification of additional issues and improvements.


image::issues-and-improvements.png[title="Collect issues and improvements", id="issues-and-improvements"]



=== Cross-Cutting Practices
(given in alphabetical order)

* <<Architectural-Understanding>>
* <<Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement>>
* <<Collect-Issues>>
* <<Expect-Denial>>
* <<Explicit-Assumption>> (work-in-progress: move to Fundamentals?)
* <<Fail-Fast>>
* <<Fast-Feedback>>
* <<Impact-Analysis>>
* <<Improvement-Backlog>>
* <<Issue-List>>
* <<Plan-Improvements>>
* <<Report-Structure>>
* <<Slide-Or-Write>>
* <<Traceability>>
* <<Widen-Your-Options>>


// image map - created manually from OmniGraffle Export
++++
<map name="CrosscuttingPractices">
   	<area shape=poly coords="52,443,133,443,139,446,139,444,142,447,142,446,145,449,145,488,139,491,59,491,52,489,49,488,46,485,46,446,52,443" href="#Goals-Constraints">
	<area shape=rect coords="302,477,412,526" href="#Plan-Improvement">
	<area shape=rect coords="11,204,91,238" href="#Widen-Your-Options">
	<area shape=rect coords="286,82,385,116" href="#Architectural-Understanding">
	<area shape=poly coords="215,375,295,375,301,378,301,377,305,380,305,378,308,381,308,420,301,423,221,423,215,422,212,420,209,417,209,378,215,375" href="#Issue-List">
	<area shape=rect coords="314,13,394,47" href="#Traceability">
	<area shape=rect coords="19,62,73,98" href="#Slide-Or-Write">
	<area shape=rect coords="90,354,174,403" href="#Separate-Cause-From-Effect">
	<area shape=rect coords="43,546,117,583" href="#Fast-Feedback">
	<area shape=rect coords="134,546,206,583" href="#Fail-Fast">
	<area shape=poly coords="409,374,498,374,505,377,505,376,509,379,509,377,512,380,512,420,505,423,416,423,409,422,405,420,402,417,402,377,409,374" href="#Improvement-Backlog">
	<area shape=rect coords="19,296,91,326" href="#Explicit-Assumption">
	<area shape=rect coords="85,24,165,63" href="#Expect-Denial">
	<area shape=rect coords="295,282,365,316" href="#Impact-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="419,193,540,242" href="#Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement">
	<area shape=rect coords="177,176,251,225" href="#Collect-Issues">

</map>

<img border=0 src="images/crosscutting-patterns-complete.png" usemap="#CrosscuttingPractices">
++++



include::patterns/crosscutting/architectural-understanding.adoc[]


[[Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement]]
=== [pattern]#Collect Opportunities for Improvement#
You should look for improvement opportunities, remedies, measures,
tactics and strategies in all of the aim42-phases.


// TODO: rename the figure to collect-opportunities-for-improvement
[[figure-collect-remedies]]
image::collect-remedies.png["collect remedies", title="Collect Remedies in All Phases"]


[[Collect-Issues]]
=== [pattern]#Collect Issues#
You should constantly watch out for issues (problems and risks), especially
during <<Analyze, analysis>> activities like <<Stakeholder-Interviews>> and others.

The artifact (physical collection) is the <<Issue-List>>.

Regularly match these issues to your
<<Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement, collection of possible improvements>>.



include::patterns/crosscutting/expect-denial.adoc[]


[[Explicit-Assumption]]
=== [pattern]#Explicit Assumption#
Compensate missing facts (especially requirements, goals, estimates,
opinions) by explicit (written) assumptions about those facts.

==== Description
Making assumptions _explicit_ is fundamentally important to
<<Capture-Quality-Requirements>>, so that development teams don't
need to rely on implicit assumptions or requirements.

When evaluating problems, risks or remedies, we often need to
estimate or assume stuff like duration, cost, workload or others.
These estimates or assumptions need to be made _explicit_,
so that others can reproduce or understand our evaluation.
In case of numerical estimation, it helps to apply
<<Estimate-In-Interval>>


Also known as _educated guess_.



[[Fail-Fast]]
=== [pattern]#Fail Fast#
The later a lack of quality is identified the higher are the costs to fix it.
Continuously evaluate the quality of work artifacts and immediately take
countermeasures or pull the plug as early as possible. Similar to <<Fast-Feedback>>.

Suitable methods to identify such situations are:

* Code reviews
* Architecture reviews
* Peer reviews
* Testing in early stages


[[Fast-Feedback]]
=== [pattern]#Fast Feedback#
TODO

See also <<Fail-Fast>>.



[[Impact-Analysis]]
=== [pattern]#Impact Analysis#

==== Intent
Determine what impact (in code, concepts, data and the organization)
a specific action or issue (e.g. refactoring, recurring problem) will or
might have. Identify the resultant effects on system development and operations.


==== Related Practices

* Failure-Mode-and-Effect-Analysis (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Failure_mode_and_effects_analysis[FMEA]), a method for failure analysis, widely used in various industries


include::patterns/crosscutting/improvement-backlog.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/issue-list.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/plan-improvement.adoc[]


include::patterns/crosscutting/report-structure.adoc[]


include::patterns/crosscutting/separate-cause-from-effect.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/slide-or-write.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/traceability.adoc[]


[[Widen-Your-Options]]
=== [pattern]#Widen Your Options#
Before taking decisions it's often a good idea to widen your decision space,
look for additional options. Sometimes it's not only "yes-or-no" decisions,
but a spectrum of additional options are available - at least if you allow
your brain to deviate from conventional path or your own preliminary conclusions.

// TODO: quote Dan + Chip Heath here!

Commit message:

Fix #55: Enhanced Fast Feedback and Fail Fast

src/main/asciidoc/crosscutting.adoc, after:

:linkattrs:

[[Crosscutting]]
== Cross-Cutting Practices and Patterns

image::01-intro-and-overview/crosscutting-phase.png["", title="Crosscutting-Phase"]

=== Goals

to be done.

=== Overview

// image map - created manually from OmniGraffle Export
++++
<map name="CrosscuttingPracticesOverview">
	<area shape=rect coords="341,3,478,50" href="#Architectural-Understanding">
	<area shape=poly coords="218,378,329,378,338,382,338,380,342,384,342,382,347,386,347,440,338,445,226,445,218,442,213,440,209,436,209,382,218,378" href="#Issue-List">
	<area shape=poly coords="517,376,641,376,651,381,651,379,655,383,655,381,660,385,660,440,651,445,526,445,517,442,512,440,507,436,507,381,517,376" href="#Improvement-Backlog">
	<area shape=rect coords="3,305,130,352" href="#Explicit-Assumption">
	<area shape=rect coords="501,167,669,235" href="#Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement">
	<area shape=rect coords="218,181,321,235" href="#Collect-Issues">
</map>

<img border=0 src="images/crosscutting-patterns-overview.png"
usemap="#CrosscuttingPracticesOverview">
++++

=== How it works

. Start with collecting issues - mainly in <<Analyze>> phase. Based upon your findings here, maintain an <<Issue-List>>

. Evaluate those, determine _values_, preferably cost. This ensures you later solve _important_ and _relevant_ issues.

. <<Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement>> and evaluate those too.

. Align issues and potential improvements, <<Plan-Improvements>>

. Continously strive to increase your <<Architectural-Understanding>>, as this
  facilitates identification of additional issues and improvements.


image::issues-and-improvements.png[title="Collect issues and improvements", id="issues-and-improvements"]



=== Cross-Cutting Practices
(given in alphabetical order)

* <<Architectural-Understanding>>
* <<Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement>>
* <<Collect-Issues>>
* <<Expect-Denial>>
* <<Explicit-Assumption>> (work-in-progress: move to Fundamentals?)
* <<Fail-Fast>>
* <<Fast-Feedback>>
* <<Impact-Analysis>>
* <<Improvement-Backlog>>
* <<Issue-List>>
* <<Plan-Improvements>>
* <<Report-Structure>>
* <<Slide-Or-Write>>
* <<Traceability>>
* <<Widen-Your-Options>>


// image map - created manually from OmniGraffle Export
++++
<map name="CrosscuttingPractices">
   	<area shape=poly coords="52,443,133,443,139,446,139,444,142,447,142,446,145,449,145,488,139,491,59,491,52,489,49,488,46,485,46,446,52,443" href="#Goals-Constraints">
	<area shape=rect coords="302,477,412,526" href="#Plan-Improvement">
	<area shape=rect coords="11,204,91,238" href="#Widen-Your-Options">
	<area shape=rect coords="286,82,385,116" href="#Architectural-Understanding">
	<area shape=poly coords="215,375,295,375,301,378,301,377,305,380,305,378,308,381,308,420,301,423,221,423,215,422,212,420,209,417,209,378,215,375" href="#Issue-List">
	<area shape=rect coords="314,13,394,47" href="#Traceability">
	<area shape=rect coords="19,62,73,98" href="#Slide-Or-Write">
	<area shape=rect coords="90,354,174,403" href="#Separate-Cause-From-Effect">
	<area shape=rect coords="43,546,117,583" href="#Fast-Feedback">
	<area shape=rect coords="134,546,206,583" href="#Fail-Fast">
	<area shape=poly coords="409,374,498,374,505,377,505,376,509,379,509,377,512,380,512,420,505,423,416,423,409,422,405,420,402,417,402,377,409,374" href="#Improvement-Backlog">
	<area shape=rect coords="19,296,91,326" href="#Explicit-Assumption">
	<area shape=rect coords="85,24,165,63" href="#Expect-Denial">
	<area shape=rect coords="295,282,365,316" href="#Impact-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="419,193,540,242" href="#Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement">
	<area shape=rect coords="177,176,251,225" href="#Collect-Issues">

</map>

<img border=0 src="images/crosscutting-patterns-complete.png" usemap="#CrosscuttingPractices">
++++



include::patterns/crosscutting/architectural-understanding.adoc[]


[[Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement]]
=== [pattern]#Collect Opportunities for Improvement#
You should look for improvement opportunities, remedies, measures,
tactics and strategies in all of the aim42-phases.


// TODO: rename the figure to collect-opportunities-for-improvement
[[figure-collect-remedies]]
image::collect-remedies.png["collect remedies", title="Collect Remedies in All Phases"]


[[Collect-Issues]]
=== [pattern]#Collect Issues#
You should constantly watch out for issues (problems and risks), especially
during <<Analyze, analysis>> activities like <<Stakeholder-Interviews>> and others.

The artifact (physical collection) is the <<Issue-List>>.

Regularly match these issues to your
<<Collect-Opportunities-For-Improvement, collection of possible improvements>>.



include::patterns/crosscutting/expect-denial.adoc[]


[[Explicit-Assumption]]
=== [pattern]#Explicit Assumption#
Compensate missing facts (especially requirements, goals, estimates,
opinions) by explicit (written) assumptions about those facts.

==== Description
Making assumptions _explicit_ is fundamentally important to
<<Capture-Quality-Requirements>>, so that development teams don't
need to rely on implicit assumptions or requirements.

When evaluating problems, risks or remedies, we often need to
estimate or assume stuff like duration, cost, workload or others.
These estimates or assumptions need to be made _explicit_,
so that others can reproduce or understand our evaluation.
In case of numerical estimation, it helps to apply
<<Estimate-In-Interval>>


Also known as _educated guess_.



[[Fail-Fast]]
=== [pattern]#Fail Fast#

"fail fast" is actually a reference to an architecture principle describing a runtime behaviour of a system. I.e. if the application already knows that a remote system is not reachable, it should not try to send other/ more requests to this system so that this system can recover. Instead the application should immediately return either an error message or - even better - a functional fallback value.

Transferring this to software improvements, a fail-fast approach would be to immediately report when an improvement can not be applied. Don't wait e.g. until the end of the sprint to communicate the failure. Instead this early feedback provides the opportunity to reflect and pivot on the improvement before the next sprint is started.

==== Takeaways

- fail-fast is actually an architecture principle for software runtime behaviour
- report failures as early as possible
- use failures as opportunities to pivot


[[Fast-Feedback]]
=== [pattern]#Fast Feedback#

Fast Feedback is a well-known term which was e.g. coined in Bruce Tulgan's book with the same name. Usually it's about "frequent, accurate, specific and timely, and FAST feedback" in evaluation of different topics e.g. performance evaluation. Fast Feedback means that we don't want to wait for six to twelve months until we get results or answers on a specific question. Instead we keep participants in a constant feedback loop so they immediately exchange information once they receive it.  

The intention behind this is, the later a lack of quality is identified the higher the costs to fix it. Continuously evaluate the quality of work artifacts and immediately take
countermeasures or pull the plug as early as possible. Similar to <<Fail-Fast>>.

Suitable methods to identify such situations are:

* Code reviews
* Architecture reviews
* Peer reviews
* Testing in early stages

See also <<Fail-Fast>>.



[[Impact-Analysis]]
=== [pattern]#Impact Analysis#

==== Intent
Determine what impact (in code, concepts, data and the organization)
a specific action or issue (e.g. refactoring, recurring problem) will or
might have. Identify the resultant effects on system development and operations.


==== Related Practices

* Failure-Mode-and-Effect-Analysis (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Failure_mode_and_effects_analysis[FMEA]), a method for failure analysis, widely used in various industries


include::patterns/crosscutting/improvement-backlog.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/issue-list.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/plan-improvement.adoc[]


include::patterns/crosscutting/report-structure.adoc[]


include::patterns/crosscutting/separate-cause-from-effect.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/slide-or-write.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/traceability.adoc[]


[[Widen-Your-Options]]
=== [pattern]#Widen Your Options#
Before taking decisions it's often a good idea to widen your decision space,
look for additional options. Sometimes it's not only "yes-or-no" decisions,
but a spectrum of additional options are available - at least if you allow
your brain to deviate from conventional path or your own preliminary conclusions.

// TODO: quote Dan + Chip Heath here!
