src/main/asciidoc/evaluate.adoc, before:

:numbered:

[[Evaluate]]
== Evaluate

image::evaluate.jpg["evaluate-phase", title="Evaluate-Phase"]

=== Goals

Make the issues, problems and risks found during the <<Analyze, analysis>>
comparable by estimating or measuring their *value*
(that's why we call this activity *evaluate*):

. estimate _value_ of problems, issues, risks and their remedies
. prioritize issues, their remedies and improvement measures

Usually evaluation implies _estimation_, only in few cases can you measure
or observe the evaluation subject and produce _hard facts_.

=== Estimation

[[figure-evaluation-concepts]]
image::evaluate-domain-conceptmap.png[title="Evaluation Concepts Domain Model"]


[width="80%",cols="3,10"]
.Evaluation Domain Concepts
|===
| Estimation | x
| Subject    | z
| Assumption | y
| Observation | o
| Parameter  | 2
| Interval   | 1
|===


=== Pattern and Practices for Evaluation

// image map - created manually from OmniGraffle Export
++++
<map name="EvaluationPractices">
	<area shape=rect coords="11,174,63,209" href="#Estimate-Feature-Value">
	<area shape=rect coords="219,249,281,283" href="#Impact-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="214,11,270,54" href="#Estimate-Problem-Cost">
	<area shape=rect coords="351,65,426,108" href="#Estimate-Remedy-Cost">
	<area shape=rect coords="58,65,133,108" href="#Estimate-Problem-Cost">
</map>
<img border=0 src="images/evaluate-patterns-conceptmap.png" usemap="#EvaluationPractices">
++++


// the detailed description of the evaluation-patterns
[[Estimate-Feature-Value]]
==== [pattern]#Estimate Feature Value#

===== Intent
Estimate the (monetary) value of a given feature, so you can compare features of the system with each other.

===== Description
* Involve business or management stakeholders, as they often have a clear notion of business value.
* If you cannot determine real numbers available, use <<Explicit-Assumption, explicit assumptions>>
* Instead of numbers, you might use categories or orders-of-magnitude (like small, medium, large). You should prefer numbers, though!



[[Estimate-In-Interval]]
==== [pattern]#Estimate in Interval#
===== Intent
Estimation is a guess, not a *measurement*.
Estimates are uncertain, otherwise they would be observations (or measurements!).

===== Description
Therefore, estimate in intervals, giving a lower and upper bound to your estimate. The difference between the two shows your confidence in the estimate. If this difference is relatively small, it shows high confidence.

CAUTION: Be aware of the anchoring effect http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anchoring

Good estimates ensure that the estimated value will be contained in the interval with a very high probability.

Estimates often rely on assumptions - which should be <<Explicit-Assumption>>.



[[Estimate-Problem-Cost]]
==== [pattern]#Estimate Problem Cost#

===== Intent
Find out how much a given problem costs (in money or effort) in a period of time.

===== Description
_Finding out_ the cost of a problem usually requires estimation or guessing, so there is
uncertainty and propability involved.

For example, if a server needs to be rebooted once every 24hrs and an operator needs 30 minutes to perform this reboot (and corresponding activities) - then you can approximate the cost of this problem for, let's say, a month:

5 workdays × 4 weeks × 30 min = 10hrs of operator-effort.

If you multiply with (approximate or average) wage, you get _problem cost_.

. If possible, try to _measure_ or observe instead of guessing or estimating.
. If you cannot determine real numbers, use <<Explicit-Assumption>>.
. If you need to guess, estimate or approximate

===== Related Practices

* <<Estimate-In-Intervall>>
* <<Explicit-Assumption>>



[[Estimate-Remedy-Cost]]
==== [pattern]#Estimate Remedy Cost#

See: "Software Estimation. The Black Art Demystified (Steve McConnell)"

Commit message:

first version of description table for Evaluation Domain Concepts

src/main/asciidoc/evaluate.adoc, after:

:numbered:

[[Evaluate]]
== Evaluate

image::evaluate.jpg["evaluate-phase", title="Evaluate-Phase"]

=== Goals

Make the issues, problems and risks found during the <<Analyze, analysis>>
comparable by estimating or measuring their *value*
(that's why we call this activity *evaluate*):

. estimate _value_ of problems, issues, risks and their remedies
. prioritize issues, their remedies and improvement measures

Usually evaluation implies _estimation_, only in few cases can you measure
or observe the evaluation subject and produce _hard facts_.

=== Estimation

[[figure-evaluation-concepts]]
image::evaluate-domain-conceptmap.png[title="Evaluation Concepts Domain Model"]


[width="80%",cols="2,8,6a", options="header"]
.Evaluation Domain Concepts
|===
| Domain concept | Explanation | Example
| Estimation | an _approximation_ of any subject
  (here: issues,problems or remedies), which is needed because
	facts or real observations are not available or possible.
	|

| Subject    |  | a recurring problem in the <<SuD>> or
associated processes

| Parameter  | an important element or foundation of the
estimation.
  |
		* number of developers on the system
	  * Lines-of-Code (LOC)

| Assumption | a fixed setting for any parameter.
  See <<Explicit-Assumption>>  
  |

| Observation | measure, count, calculate gather real data
for parameters  | if every developer is
concerned by the problem, we count their number.

| Interval   | see <<Estimate-In-Interval>> | between 15 and 25%

|===


=== Pattern and Practices for Evaluation

// image map - created manually from OmniGraffle Export
++++
<map name="EvaluationPractices">
	<area shape=rect coords="11,174,63,209" href="#Estimate-Feature-Value">
	<area shape=rect coords="219,249,281,283" href="#Impact-Analysis">
	<area shape=rect coords="214,11,270,54" href="#Estimate-Problem-Cost">
	<area shape=rect coords="351,65,426,108" href="#Estimate-Remedy-Cost">
	<area shape=rect coords="58,65,133,108" href="#Estimate-Problem-Cost">
</map>
<img border=0 src="images/evaluate-patterns-conceptmap.png" usemap="#EvaluationPractices">
++++


// the detailed description of the evaluation-patterns
[[Estimate-Feature-Value]]
==== [pattern]#Estimate Feature Value#

===== Intent
Estimate the (monetary) value of a given feature, so you can compare features of the system with each other.

===== Description
* Involve business or management stakeholders, as they often have a clear notion of business value.
* If you cannot determine real numbers available, use <<Explicit-Assumption, explicit assumptions>>
* Instead of numbers, you might use categories or orders-of-magnitude (like small, medium, large). You should prefer numbers, though!



[[Estimate-In-Interval]]
==== [pattern]#Estimate in Interval#
===== Intent
Estimation is a guess, not a *measurement*.
Estimates are uncertain, otherwise they would be observations (or measurements!).

===== Description
Therefore, estimate in intervals, giving a lower and upper bound to your estimate. The difference between the two shows your confidence in the estimate. If this difference is relatively small, it shows high confidence.

CAUTION: Be aware of the anchoring effect http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anchoring

Good estimates ensure that the estimated value will be contained in the interval with a very high probability.

Estimates often rely on assumptions - which should be <<Explicit-Assumption>>.



[[Estimate-Problem-Cost]]
==== [pattern]#Estimate Problem Cost#

===== Intent
Find out how much a given problem costs (in money or effort) in a period of time.

===== Description
_Finding out_ the cost of a problem usually requires estimation or guessing, so there is
uncertainty and propability involved.

For example, if a server needs to be rebooted once every 24hrs and an operator needs 30 minutes to perform this reboot (and corresponding activities) - then you can approximate the cost of this problem for, let's say, a month:

5 workdays × 4 weeks × 30 min = 10hrs of operator-effort.

If you multiply with (approximate or average) wage, you get _problem cost_.

. If possible, try to _measure_ or observe instead of guessing or estimating.
. If you cannot determine real numbers, use <<Explicit-Assumption>>.
. If you need to guess, estimate or approximate

===== Related Practices

* <<Estimate-In-Intervall>>
* <<Explicit-Assumption>>



[[Estimate-Remedy-Cost]]
==== [pattern]#Estimate Remedy Cost#

See: "Software Estimation. The Black Art Demystified (Steve McConnell)"
