src/main/asciidoc/improve.adoc, before:


[[Improve]]
== Improve

image::improve.jpg["improve-phase", title="Improve-Phase"]

=== Goals

. Plan and coordinate measures and opportunities for improvements to eliminate problems and issues found during <<Analyze, analysis>>. A whole <<Determine-Improvement-Approach ,category of practices>> is devoted to this step, called <<Determine-Improvement-Approach>>

. Apply selected opportunities for improvement

* Change code, structures, concepts or processes to achieve better software,
* Reduce costs and/or technical debt,
* Eliminate issues found during analysis phase,
* Optimize quality attributes (like performance, maintainability, security),
* Optimize operation and administration processes, effort and cost.



[[improvement-domain]]
=== Structure of Improvement Practices

// image map - created manually from OmniGraffle Export
++++
<map name="ImproveConceptsOverview">
<area shape=rect coords="71,50,260,112" href="#improve-practices">
	<area shape=poly coords="71,54,260,54,260,11,11,11,11,54,11,112,71,112,71,54" href="#improve-approaches">
	<area shape=rect coords="11,112,260,158" href="#improve-fundamentals">
</map>
<img border=0 src="images/improve-concepts-overview.jpg" usemap="#ImproveConceptsOverview">
++++
.Concepts For Improvement


[horizontal]
<<Fundamentals>>:: Some principles which you should consider whatever steps you take on your road to improvement.

<<Approaches>>:: Overall (strategic, long-term) decisions how to tackle improvement. Examples include *Big-Bang*, *Strangulate-Bad-Parts*, *Change-Via-Split*.  

<<improve-practices, Practices>>:: fine-grained practices or patterns, structured in several <<improve-categories,categories>>.


==== Fundamentals
For improvement we take a number of fundamental principles for granted, 
depicted in figure <<Improvement Fundamentals>>.


[[improve-fundamentals]]
.Improvement Fundamentals
image::improve-fundamentals.png[]

These fundamental principles surely belong to software engineering good practices - but we consider them indispendsable for improvement projects.

[horizontal]
[pattern]#Fast-Feedback#:: 
Get feedback to your actions and changes as early as possible, so you can adjust as quickly as adequate. 

[pattern]#Improve Iteratively#:: 
Improve in (potentially small) iterations and/or increments, so
that change does not disturb or negatively affect the system, its associated
processes and organisation. Iterations are the prerequiste for our whole _phased improvement_.

[pattern]#Prototype-Improvement#:: Verify the viability and effectiveness of improvements,
usually in smaller scales with reasonable risks. 

[pattern]#Verify-After-Every-Change#:: Always make sure that changes,
even minor ones, leave your system intact. (The awesome Jerry Weinberg has written
up several http://secretsofconsulting.blogspot.de/2015/01/some-very-expensive-software-failures.html[examples of such failures]).

[pattern]#Reduce Complexity#:: Simpler solutions are most often easier to comprehend,
maintain and operate. Therefore always strive for simplicity and the reduction
of accidental, unneccessary complexity.

[pattern]#Explicit Assumption#:: Compensate missing facts (especially requirements, goals, estimates, opinions) by explicit (written) assumptions about those facts. See <<Explicit-Assumption>>.

[pattern]#Group Improvement Actions#:: Group related actions, so that they refer
to similar entities and potential synergies are utilized.
 

[[improve-approaches]]
==== Approaches
The central decision you should take is the improvement-approach, the overall, long-range or *strategic* decision how you want to tackle your improvement:

TODO: Describe Approaches

[pattern]#Change-Via-Copy#:: Create two or more identical copies of the whole system. Clean-up (reduce, gut) those copies individually, and then evolve the copies independently.

[pattern]#Change-Via-Split#:: Split up the original system into (not neccessarily distinct) parts. Clean-up those parts individually, and then evolve the parts independently. 
[small]#(similar, but not identical to Change-Via-Copy)#

[pattern]#Keep-Data-Toss-Code#:: As value sometimes resides in data, keep data intact and replace the functional/service/process part of a system.

[pattern]#Frontend-Switch#:: Start creating new backend parts. Frontend routes some requests to those new backend parts, others still to the existing ones. Gradually enhancing the new backend parts, frontend routes more and more requests to new backend.

[pattern]#Big-Bang#:: Keep the existing system for a limited time, apply only critical bugfixes. In parallel, build a replacement system. Replace old by new at predefined time.

[pattern]#Strangulate-Bad-Parts#:: TBD


[pattern]#Evolution#:: This approach has been extensively practiced by a Swiss Bank and published
as a  http://www.amazon.de/Managed-Evolution-Strategy-Information-Systems/dp/3642016324[book]. 
Underlying idea is to refactor those parts of the system(s) which are actually to be changed, especially to move all interfaces to new service standard and replace all legacy technologies and other couplings (via DB etc). Over time services should emerge that can be moved to a new platform altogether (from Mainframe to Java).


[[improve-categories]]
==== Categories

We divide improvement practices into several categories (shown in 
figure <<Improvement Categories>>). 



[[improvement-categories]]
.Improvement Categories
image::improve-categories.png["improvement-categories", title="Improvement Categories"]

// TODO: Describe meaning/definition of categories





[[improve-practices]]
=== Practices for Improvement

[[improvement-practices-1]]
.Improvement Practices (Part 1)
image::improve-patterns-rest.png["improvement-practices", title="Improvement Practices (Part 1)"]


[[improvement-practices-2]]
.Improvement Practices (Part 2, Code Restructuring Practices)
image::improve-patterns-codestructure.png["code-improvement-practices", title="Improvement Practices (Part 2, Code Restructuring Practices)"]



==== Practices in Detail

(given in alphabetical order)

* <<Anticorruption-Layer>>
* <<Assertions>>
* <<Automated-Tests>>
* <<Branch-For-Improvement>>
* <<Extract-Reusable-Component>>
* <<Front-End-Switch>>
* <<Group-Improvement-Actions>>
* <<Handle-If-Else-Chains>>
* <<Improve-Code-Layout>>
* <<Improve-Logging>>
* <<Interface-Segregation-Principle>>
* <<Introduce-Boy-Scout-Rule>>
* <<Introduce-Layering>>
* <<Isolate-Changes>>
* <<Keep-Data-Toss-Code>>
* <<Manage-Complex-Client-Dependencies-With-Facade>>
* <<Measure>>
* <<Never-Change-Running-System>>
* <<Never-Rewrite-Running-System>>
* <<Quality-Driven-Software-Architecture>>
* <<Refactoring>>
* <<Refactoring-Plan>>
* <<Remove-Nested-Control-Structures>>
* <<Sample-For-Improvement>>
* <<Schedule-Work>>
* <<Untangle-Code>>
* <<Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies>>


include::patterns/improve/anticorruption-layer.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/Improve-Logging.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/interface-segregation-principle.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/introduce-boy-scout-rule.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/manage-complex-client-dependencies-with-facade.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/Measure.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies.adoc[]

Commit message:

included improvement-approaches as diagram

src/main/asciidoc/improve.adoc, after:


[[Improve]]
== Improve

image::improve.jpg["improve-phase", title="Improve-Phase"]

=== Goals

. Plan and coordinate measures and opportunities for improvements to eliminate problems and issues found during <<Analyze, analysis>>. A whole <<Determine-Improvement-Approach ,category of practices>> is devoted to this step, called <<Determine-Improvement-Approach>>

. Apply selected opportunities for improvement

* Change code, structures, concepts or processes to achieve better software,
* Reduce costs and/or technical debt,
* Eliminate issues found during analysis phase,
* Optimize quality attributes (like performance, maintainability, security),
* Optimize operation and administration processes, effort and cost.



[[improvement-domain]]
=== Structure of Improvement Practices

// image map - created manually from OmniGraffle Export
++++
<map name="ImproveConceptsOverview">
<area shape=rect coords="71,50,260,112" href="#improve-practices">
	<area shape=poly coords="71,54,260,54,260,11,11,11,11,54,11,112,71,112,71,54" href="#improve-approaches">
	<area shape=rect coords="11,112,260,158" href="#improve-fundamentals">
</map>
<img border=0 src="images/improve-concepts-overview.jpg" usemap="#ImproveConceptsOverview">
++++
.Concepts For Improvement


[horizontal]
<<Fundamentals>>:: Some principles which you should consider whatever steps you take on your road to improvement.

<<Approaches>>:: Overall (strategic, long-term) decisions how to tackle improvement. Examples include *Big-Bang*, *Strangulate-Bad-Parts*, *Change-Via-Split*.  

<<improve-practices, Practices>>:: fine-grained practices or patterns, structured in several <<improve-categories,categories>>.


==== Fundamentals
For improvement we take a number of fundamental principles for granted, 
depicted in figure <<Improvement Fundamentals>>.


[[improve-fundamentals]]
.Improvement Fundamentals
image::improve-fundamentals.png[]

These fundamental principles surely belong to software engineering good practices - but we consider them indispendsable for improvement projects.

[horizontal]
[pattern]#Fast-Feedback#:: 
Get feedback to your actions and changes as early as possible, so you can adjust as quickly as adequate. 

[pattern]#Improve Iteratively#:: 
Improve in (potentially small) iterations and/or increments, so
that change does not disturb or negatively affect the system, its associated
processes and organisation. Iterations are the prerequiste for our whole _phased improvement_.

[pattern]#Prototype-Improvement#:: Verify the viability and effectiveness of improvements,
usually in smaller scales with reasonable risks. 

[pattern]#Verify-After-Every-Change#:: Always make sure that changes,
even minor ones, leave your system intact. (The awesome Jerry Weinberg has written
up several http://secretsofconsulting.blogspot.de/2015/01/some-very-expensive-software-failures.html[examples of such failures]).

[pattern]#Reduce Complexity#:: Simpler solutions are most often easier to comprehend,
maintain and operate. Therefore always strive for simplicity and the reduction
of accidental, unneccessary complexity.

[pattern]#Explicit Assumption#:: Compensate missing facts (especially requirements, goals, estimates, opinions) by explicit (written) assumptions about those facts. See <<Explicit-Assumption>>.

[pattern]#Group Improvement Actions#:: Group related actions, so that they refer
to similar entities and potential synergies are utilized.
 

[[improve-approaches]]
==== Approaches
The central decision you should take is the improvement-approach, the overall, long-range or *strategic* decision how you want to tackle your improvement.

[[fig-improvement-approaches]]
.Improvement Approaches
image::improve-approaches.png[]


TODO: Describe Approaches

[pattern]#Change-Via-Copy#:: Create two or more identical copies of the whole system. Clean-up (reduce, gut) those copies individually, and then evolve the copies independently.

[pattern]#Change-Via-Split#:: Split up the original system into (not neccessarily distinct) parts. Clean-up those parts individually, and then evolve the parts independently. 
[small]#(similar, but not identical to Change-Via-Copy)#

[pattern]#Keep-Data-Toss-Code#:: As value sometimes resides in data, keep data intact and replace the functional/service/process part of a system.

[pattern]#Frontend-Switch#:: Start creating new backend parts. Frontend routes some requests to those new backend parts, others still to the existing ones. Gradually enhancing the new backend parts, frontend routes more and more requests to new backend.

[pattern]#Big-Bang#:: Keep the existing system for a limited time, apply only critical bugfixes. In parallel, build a replacement system. Replace old by new at predefined time.

[pattern]#Strangulate-Bad-Parts#:: TBD


[pattern]#Evolution#:: This approach has been extensively practiced by a Swiss Bank and published
as a  http://www.amazon.de/Managed-Evolution-Strategy-Information-Systems/dp/3642016324[book]. 
Underlying idea is to refactor those parts of the system(s) which are actually to be changed, especially to move all interfaces to new service standard and replace all legacy technologies and other couplings (via DB etc). Over time services should emerge that can be moved to a new platform altogether (from Mainframe to Java).


[[improve-categories]]
==== Categories

We divide improvement practices into several categories (shown in 
figure <<Improvement Categories>>). 



[[improvement-categories]]
.Improvement Categories
image::improve-categories.png["improvement-categories", title="Improvement Categories"]

// TODO: Describe meaning/definition of categories





[[improve-practices]]
=== Practices for Improvement

[[improvement-practices-1]]
.Improvement Practices (Part 1)
image::improve-patterns-rest.png["improvement-practices", title="Improvement Practices (Part 1)"]


[[improvement-practices-2]]
.Improvement Practices (Part 2, Code Restructuring Practices)
image::improve-patterns-codestructure.png["code-improvement-practices", title="Improvement Practices (Part 2, Code Restructuring Practices)"]



==== Practices in Detail

(given in alphabetical order)

* <<Anticorruption-Layer>>
* <<Assertions>>
* <<Automated-Tests>>
* <<Branch-For-Improvement>>
* <<Extract-Reusable-Component>>
* <<Front-End-Switch>>
* <<Group-Improvement-Actions>>
* <<Handle-If-Else-Chains>>
* <<Improve-Code-Layout>>
* <<Improve-Logging>>
* <<Interface-Segregation-Principle>>
* <<Introduce-Boy-Scout-Rule>>
* <<Introduce-Layering>>
* <<Isolate-Changes>>
* <<Keep-Data-Toss-Code>>
* <<Manage-Complex-Client-Dependencies-With-Facade>>
* <<Measure>>
* <<Never-Change-Running-System>>
* <<Never-Rewrite-Running-System>>
* <<Quality-Driven-Software-Architecture>>
* <<Refactoring>>
* <<Refactoring-Plan>>
* <<Remove-Nested-Control-Structures>>
* <<Sample-For-Improvement>>
* <<Schedule-Work>>
* <<Untangle-Code>>
* <<Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies>>


include::patterns/improve/anticorruption-layer.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/Improve-Logging.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/interface-segregation-principle.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/introduce-boy-scout-rule.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/manage-complex-client-dependencies-with-facade.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/Measure.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies.adoc[]
