src/main/asciidoc/patterns/analyze/context-analysis.adoc, before:

[[Context-Analysis]]

==== [pattern]#Context-Analysis# 

===== Intent
* Analyse external interfaces for risk, technology, business value and other factors. 

* Use the context to gain _overview_ of the System within its business or
technical environment.
 
* Identify risks or problems in the immediate vicinity of the System.

===== Terminology
We distinguish the following terms in context analysis:

Business Context:: Adjacent organizations, applications, users or interfaces either requiring or providing services or data from or to the System. The business context can be used to describe the overall business process(es) the System is involved in.  

Technical Context:: Adjacent hardware or technical infrastructure, either required by the System or providing data or events to it. When the System can be used or operated in different hardware infrastructures, there might exist several different technical contexts.

===== Example
In the context diagram example of fig. <<context-view-example>>

[[context-view-example]]
image::context-view-example.png["Example of Context View", title="Example of Context View"]



===== Description

TODO:

* find issues associated with external interfaces, e.g.:
** overly complex 
** brittle
** unsuitable technology or implementation
** underdocumented, poorly understood
** high operational effort
** high cost-of-change or maintenance costs
** difficult or impossible to modify/enhance/change

Commit message:

elaborated context example by adding tabular description of contained elements

src/main/asciidoc/patterns/analyze/context-analysis.adoc, after:

[[Context-Analysis]]

==== [pattern]#Context-Analysis# 

===== Intent
* Analyse external interfaces for risk, technology, business value and other factors. 

* Use the context to gain _overview_ of the System within its business or
technical environment.
 
* Identify risks or problems in the immediate vicinity of the System.

===== Terminology
We distinguish the following terms in context analysis:

Business Context:: Adjacent organizations, applications, users or interfaces either requiring or providing services or data from or to the System. The business context can be used to describe the overall business process(es) the System is involved in.  

Technical Context:: Adjacent hardware or technical infrastructure, either required by the System or providing data or events to it. When the System can be used or operated in different hardware infrastructures, there might exist several different technical contexts.

===== Example
In the context diagram example of fig. <<context-view-example>> you see some user roles and some external systems. The context diagram is accompanied by a tabular
description of the elements and/or relationships.
[small]#Example taken from the https://github.com/aim42/htmlSanityCheck[HtmlSanityCheck] open source project.#

[[context-view-example]]
image::context-view-example.png["Example of Context View", title="Example of Context View"]

[options="header", cols="1,4"]
.Business Context
|===
| Neighbor | Description
| user | documents software with toolchain that generates html. Wants to ensure that
links within this html are valid.
| build system |
| local html files | kbd:[HtmlSC] reads and parses local html files and
performs sanity checks within those.
| local image files | kbd:[HtmlSC] checks if linked images exist as (local) files.
| external web resources | kbd:[HtmlSC] can be configured to optionally check for the existence
of external web resources. Due to the nature of web systems, this check might need a significant
amount of time and might yield invalid results due to network and latency issues.
|===

===== Description

TODO:

* find issues associated with external interfaces, e.g.:
** overly complex 
** brittle
** unsuitable technology or implementation
** underdocumented, poorly understood
** high operational effort
** high cost-of-change or maintenance costs
** difficult or impossible to modify/enhance/change
