src/main/asciidoc/patterns/category-improve-architecture-and-code.adoc, before:

[[improve-architecture]]
=== Improve Architecture and Code Structure

NOTE: This category contains a fairly large number of practices.


[[fig-improve-architecture]]
.Practices for "Improve Architecture and Code Structure"
image::improve-practice-architecture.png["Practices to Improve Architecture", title="Practices to improve architecture and code structure"]


==== Architecture and Code Practices in Detail

(given in alphabetical order)

* <<Anticorruption-Layer>>
* <<Assertions>>
* <<Automated-Tests>>
* <<Branch-For-Improvement>>
* <<Extract-Reusable-Component>>
* <<Front-End-Switch>>
* <<Group-Improvement-Actions>>
* <<Handle-If-Else-Chains>>
* <<Improve-Code-Layout>>
* <<Improve-feedback-from-and-for-stakeholders>>
* <<Improve-Logging>>
* <<Interface-Segregation-Principle>>
* <<Introduce-Boy-Scout-Rule>>
* <<Introduce-Layering>>
* <<Isolate-Changes>>
* <<Keep-Data-Toss-Code>>
* <<Manage-Complex-Client-Dependencies-With-Facade>>
* <<Measure>>
* <<Never-Change-Running-System>>
* <<Never-Rewrite-Running-System>>
* <<Quality-Driven-Software-Architecture>>
* <<Refactoring>>
* <<Refactoring-Plan>>
* <<Remove-Nested-Control-Structures>>
* <<Sample-For-Improvement>>
* <<Schedule-Work>>
* <<Untangle-Code>>
* <<Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies>>


include::improve/anticorruption-layer.adoc[]
include::improve/Improve-Logging.adoc[]
include::improve/interface-segregation-principle.adoc[]
include::improve/introduce-boy-scout-rule.adoc[]
include::improve/manage-complex-client-dependencies-with-facade.adoc[]
include::improve/Measure.adoc[]
include::improve/Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies.adoc[]
include::improve/Improve-feedback-from-and-for-stakeholders.adoc[]

Commit message:

more cross-references between overview and details in improve practices

src/main/asciidoc/patterns/category-improve-architecture-and-code.adoc, after:

[[improve-architecture]]
=== Improve Architecture and Code Structure

NOTE: This category contains a fairly large number of practices.


[[fig-improve-architecture]]
.Practices for "Improve Architecture and Code Structure"
image::improve-practice-architecture.png["Practices to Improve Architecture", title="Practices to improve architecture and code structure"]

For an overview of other improvement practices,
see <<improve-practices-overview>>.

==== Architecture and Code Practices in Detail

(given in alphabetical order)

* <<Anticorruption-Layer>>
* <<Assertions>>
* <<Automated-Tests>>
* <<Branch-For-Improvement>>
* <<Extract-Reusable-Component>>
* <<Front-End-Switch>>
* <<Group-Improvement-Actions>>
* <<Handle-If-Else-Chains>>
* <<Improve-Code-Layout>>
* <<Improve-feedback-from-and-for-stakeholders>>
* <<Improve-Logging>>
* <<Interface-Segregation-Principle>>
* <<Introduce-Boy-Scout-Rule>>
* <<Introduce-Layering>>
* <<Isolate-Changes>>
* <<Keep-Data-Toss-Code>>
* <<Manage-Complex-Client-Dependencies-With-Facade>>
* <<Measure>>
* <<Never-Change-Running-System>>
* <<Never-Rewrite-Running-System>>
* <<Quality-Driven-Software-Architecture>>
* <<Refactoring>>
* <<Refactoring-Plan>>
* <<Remove-Nested-Control-Structures>>
* <<Sample-For-Improvement>>
* <<Schedule-Work>>
* <<Untangle-Code>>
* <<Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies>>


include::improve/anticorruption-layer.adoc[]
include::improve/Improve-Logging.adoc[]
include::improve/interface-segregation-principle.adoc[]
include::improve/introduce-boy-scout-rule.adoc[]
include::improve/manage-complex-client-dependencies-with-facade.adoc[]
include::improve/Measure.adoc[]
include::improve/Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies.adoc[]
include::improve/Improve-feedback-from-and-for-stakeholders.adoc[]
