guide/src/asciidoc/aim42_introduction.adoc, before:




== aim42 - Short Introduction 


=== Why is software being changed?

Software systems, at least most of those that are practically used, are changed all the 
time. Features are added, modified or removed, user interaction is streamlined, 
performance is tuned, changes to external interfaces or systems are reflected.

* people need new features
* existing features have to be modified or removed
* external interfaces have been changed - our system has to cope with these changes
* data structures we rely on have been changed
* system needs to be integrated with _new neighbour_
* system needs to comply to new regulations or laws
* system needs new or improved user interface
* some technology, framework or product used within the system is not available any longer and needs to be replaced
* resource consumption needs to be optimized
* system needs to work faster 
* system needs to become more reliable or fault-tolerant
* operational costs have to be reduced
* maintenance costs have to be reduced
* technical debt has to be reduced
* existing documentation does not reflect the truth (any more)

You see - lots of good reasons :-)


=== Why does software need improvement?

The most important reason is depicted in the following diagram: The cost-of-change
of most software increases heavily over time... making those people really unhappy that
have to pay for these changes (called maintenance, evolution, new-features or else)

An additional effect of long-term maintenance of software is the strong
_decrease in understandability_: When a system matures it becomes more and more difficult to understand its inner workings, changes become increasingly risky and consequences of changes become difficult to foresee which can render effort estimations quite blurry.


image::cost-of-change.jpg[]

// TODO: exchange image to reflect both cost and understandability.


These negative effects share a few common root-causes: 

. lack of _conceptual integrity_
. _internal disorder_ 
. overly _complex internal structure_, either of source code or data
. overly _complex concepts_ (crosscutting solutions for fine-grained problems)
. overly complex or inappropriate internal processes
. inapropriate selection of _technology_ (_frameworks, libraries or languages_)
. (you can surely find a few more...)


==== Long-Term Goal

In the beginning, though, everything was fine: nice coupling and cohesion, appropriate technologies, well written code, understandable structures and concepts (see figure <<figure-target-situation>>)

But as more and more changes, modifications, tweaks and supposed _optimizations_ were performed under growing time and budget pressure, things got nasty. The maintainers piled up so called _technical debt_ (us software folks call it quick-hack, quick-and-dirty-fix, detours or abbreviations). We're quite sure you know what we're talking about - we experienced it over and over again, it seems to be the normal situation, not the (bad) exception.

Investment in methodical and systematic software architecture improvement will have the following effect.

[[figure-target-situation]]
image::target-situation.jpg["target situation", title="Goal: Maintainable Software"]
 

=== How does aim42 work? 


==== Three Simple Phases 

[[figure-aim-phases]]
image::aim42-phases.jpg["aim42 phases", title="Three Phases of aim42"]

. <<Analyze>>: note down problems, risks, deficiencies and technical debt within your system and your development process. Focus on problems in this phase, not on potential solution approaches. In addition, develop (and document) an understanding of internal structures, concepts and architectural approaches.

. <<Evaluate>>: determine the „value“ of problems, issues and their remedies, prioritize them

. <<Improve>>: systematically improve code and structures, reduce technical debt, remove waste and optimize.

Look for improvement opportunities, remedies, measures, tactics and strategies in all of these phases.


[[figure-collect-remedies]]
image::collect-remedies.png["collect remedies", title="Collect Remedies in All Phases"]
 


=== Patterns and Practices Provide No Guarantee
We are *very* sure that aim42 can work for your system or your organization. 
But (yes, there's always a but) we cannot guarantee: Maybe your software is so
*extraordinaire*, so very special, that it needs other treatment.

Maybe your organization does not fit our prerequisites, or is way more advanced
than we anticipated in our approach...

You have to use all practices, patterns and approaches of aim42 at your own risk 
and responsibility. We (the aim42 contributor team) can by no means be held 
responsible for any results of applying aim42.


=== The Team

* Gernot Starke (innoQ Fellow, project founder): setup, patterns, practices
* Alex Heusingfeld (innoQ): hero-of-the-build, Travis-CI integration
* Michael Mahlberg (Consulting Guild): patterns and practices
* Burkhard Neppert (innoQ): review, method
* Oliver Tigges (innoQ): patterns and practices
* Stefan Tilkov (innoQ): maintenance and evolution patterns

Commit message:

* iteratation-image * collect remedies diagram

guide/src/asciidoc/aim42_introduction.adoc, after:




== aim42 - Short Introduction 


=== Why is software being changed?

Software systems, at least most of those that are practically used, are changed all the 
time. Features are added, modified or removed, user interaction is streamlined, 
performance is tuned, changes to external interfaces or systems are reflected.

* people need new features
* existing features have to be modified or removed
* external interfaces have been changed - our system has to cope with these changes
* data structures we rely on have been changed
* system needs to be integrated with _new neighbour_
* system needs to comply to new regulations or laws
* system needs new or improved user interface
* some technology, framework or product used within the system is not available any longer and needs to be replaced
* resource consumption needs to be optimized
* system needs to work faster 
* system needs to become more reliable or fault-tolerant
* operational costs have to be reduced
* maintenance costs have to be reduced
* technical debt has to be reduced
* existing documentation does not reflect the truth (any more)

You see - lots of good reasons :-)


=== Why does software need improvement?

The most important reason is depicted in the following diagram: The cost-of-change
of most software increases heavily over time... making those people really unhappy that
have to pay for these changes (called maintenance, evolution, new-features or else)

An additional effect of long-term maintenance of software is the strong
_decrease in understandability_: When a system matures it becomes more and more difficult to understand its inner workings, changes become increasingly risky and consequences of changes become difficult to foresee which can render effort estimations quite blurry.


image::cost-of-change.jpg[]

// TODO: exchange image to reflect both cost and understandability.


These negative effects share a few common root-causes: 

. lack of _conceptual integrity_
. _internal disorder_ 
. overly _complex internal structure_, either of source code or data
. overly _complex concepts_ (crosscutting solutions for fine-grained problems)
. overly complex or inappropriate internal processes
. inapropriate selection of _technology_ (_frameworks, libraries or languages_)
. (you can surely find a few more...)


==== Long-Term Goal

In the beginning, though, everything was fine: nice coupling and cohesion, appropriate technologies, well written code, understandable structures and concepts (see figure <<figure-target-situation>>)

But as more and more changes, modifications, tweaks and supposed _optimizations_ were performed under growing time and budget pressure, things got nasty. The maintainers piled up so called _technical debt_ (us software folks call it quick-hack, quick-and-dirty-fix, detours or abbreviations). We're quite sure you know what we're talking about - we experienced it over and over again, it seems to be the normal situation, not the (bad) exception.

Investment in methodical and systematic software architecture improvement will have the following effect.

[[figure-target-situation]]
image::target-situation.jpg["target situation", title="Goal: Maintainable Software"]
 

=== How does aim42 work? 


==== Three Simple Phases 

[[figure-aim-phases]]
image::aim42-phases.jpg["aim42 phases", title="Three Phases of aim42"]

. <<Analyze>>: note down problems, risks, deficiencies and technical debt within your system and your development process. Focus on problems in this phase, not on potential solution approaches. In addition, develop (and document) an understanding of internal structures, concepts and architectural approaches.

. <<Evaluate>>: determine the „value“ of problems, issues and their remedies, prioritize them

. <<Improve>>: systematically improve code and structures, reduce technical debt, remove waste and optimize.


=== Collect Opportunities for Improvement
Look for improvement opportunities, remedies, measures, tactics and strategies in all of these phases.


[[figure-collect-remedies]]
image::collect-remedies.png["collect remedies", title="Collect Remedies in All Phases"]
 

=== Iterative Approach
In compliance with modern agile development methodologies, aim42 fundamentally depends on iteration and feedback between the phases.

[[figure-iterate-phases]]
image::iterate-phases.jpg["iterate phases", title="Iterate Between Phases"]


=== Patterns and Practices Provide No Guarantee
We are *very* sure that aim42 can work for your system or your organization. 
But (yes, there's always a but) we cannot guarantee: Maybe your software is so
*extraordinaire*, so very special, that it needs other treatment.

Maybe your organization does not fit our prerequisites, or is way more advanced
than we anticipated in our approach...

You have to use all practices, patterns and approaches of aim42 at your own risk 
and responsibility. We (the aim42 contributor team) can by no means be held 
responsible for any results of applying aim42.


=== The Team

* Gernot Starke (innoQ Fellow, project founder): setup, patterns, practices
* Alex Heusingfeld (innoQ): hero-of-the-build, Travis-CI integration
* Michael Mahlberg (Consulting Guild): patterns and practices
* Burkhard Neppert (innoQ): review, method
* Oliver Tigges (innoQ): patterns and practices
* Stefan Tilkov (innoQ): maintenance and evolution patterns
