guide/src/asciidoc/analyze.adoc, before:

[[Analyze]]

== Analyze

image::analyze.jpg["analyze-phase", title="Analyze-Phase"]

=== Goals

. Find all problems, issues, symptoms, risks or technical debt within the system, its operation, maintenance or otherwise related processes.

. Develop and document an understanding of internal structures, concepts and architectural approaches.

. Understand root causes of the problems found, potential interdependencies between issues


=== How it works

Systematically look for such issues at various places and with various people.

INFO: To effectively find issues, you need an appropriate amount of _understanding_ of the systems, its technical concepts, code-structure, inner workings, major external interfaces and its development process.


. Start with a <<Qualitative-Analysis,qualitative analysis>> of the system, its architecture and surrounding organization
. Perform <<Static-Code-Analysis, static code analysis>>
. 
. Conduct <<Stakeholder-Interviews, stakeholder interviews>>
. Perform a number of *runtime analysis*, e.g. performance and load monitoring, process and thread analysis
. Inspect the data created, modified and queried by the system, for structure, size, volume or specialities
. Inspect and analyze all involved organizational processes
(development, project-management, operations, requirements-analysis)   


WARNING: Never start solving problems until you have a thourough understanding of current stakeholder requirements. Otherwise you risk wasting effort in areas that no influential stakeholder cares about.




=== Patterns and Practices for Analysis
(given in alphabetical order)

* Architecture Analysis, see <<Qualitative-Analysis>> and <<ATAM>>
* <<Capture-Quality-Requirements>>
* <<Context-Analysis>>
* <<Data-Analysis>>
* <<Debugging>>
* <<Development-Process-Analysis>>
* <<Documentation-Analysis>>
* <<Issue-Tracker-Analysis>>
* <<Profiling>>
* <<Qualitative-Analysis>>
* <<Quantitative-Analysis>>
* <<Questionnaire>>, especially <<Pre-Interview-Questionnaire>>
* <<Requirements-Analysis>>
* <<Root-Cause-Analysis, Root Cause Analysis>> - finding the root-cause of problems
* <<Runtime-Artifact-Analysis>>* 
* <<Software-Archaeology, Software Archeology>>
* <<Stakeholder-Analysis>>
* <<Stakeholder-Interview>>
* <<Static-Code-Analysis>> (Structural analysis)
* <<Use-Case-Cluster>>
* <<View-Based-Understanding, View Based Understanding>>


// the detailed description of tha analysis-patterns

include::patterns/analyze/debugging.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/root-cause-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/software-archeology.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/static-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/take-what-they-mean.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/view-based-understanding.adoc[]

Commit message:

* first version of "capture-quality-requirements" (a lot is still missing) * first skeleton of "qualitative analysis"

guide/src/asciidoc/analyze.adoc, after:

[[Analyze]]

== Analyze

image::analyze.jpg["analyze-phase", title="Analyze-Phase"]

=== Goals

. Find all problems, issues, symptoms, risks or technical debt within the system, its operation, maintenance or otherwise related processes.

. Develop and document an understanding of internal structures, concepts and architectural approaches.

. Understand root causes of the problems found, potential interdependencies between issues


=== How it works

Systematically look for such issues at various places and with various people.

INFO: To effectively find issues, you need an appropriate amount of _understanding_ of the systems, its technical concepts, code-structure, inner workings, major external interfaces and its development process.


. Start <<capture-quality-requirements, capturing current quality requirements>> from the _authoritative_ stakeholders of the systems.
. Conduct a <<Qualitative-Analysis,qualitative analysis>> of the system, its architecture and surrounding organization, based upon the specific quality requirements 
. Perform <<Static-Code-Analysis, static code analysis>>
. Conduct <<Stakeholder-Interviews, stakeholder interviews>>
. Perform a number of *runtime analysis*, e.g. performance and load monitoring, process and thread analysis
. Inspect the data created, modified and queried by the system, for structure, size, volume or specialities
. Inspect and analyze all involved organizational processes
(development, project-management, operations, requirements-analysis)   


WARNING: Never start solving problems until you have a thourough understanding of current stakeholder requirements. Otherwise you risk wasting effort in areas that no influential stakeholder cares about.




=== Patterns and Practices for Analysis
(given in alphabetical order)

* Architecture Analysis, see <<Qualitative-Analysis>> and <<ATAM>>
* <<Capture-Quality-Requirements>>
* <<Context-Analysis>>
* <<Data-Analysis>>
* <<Debugging>>
* <<Development-Process-Analysis>>
* <<Documentation-Analysis>>
* <<Issue-Tracker-Analysis>>
* <<Profiling>>
* <<Qualitative-Analysis>>
* <<Quantitative-Analysis>>
* <<Questionnaire>>, especially <<Pre-Interview-Questionnaire>>
* <<Requirements-Analysis>>
* <<Root-Cause-Analysis, Root Cause Analysis>> - finding the root-cause of problems
* <<Runtime-Artifact-Analysis>>* 
* <<Software-Archaeology, Software Archeology>>
* <<Stakeholder-Analysis>>
* <<Stakeholder-Interview>>
* <<Static-Code-Analysis>> (Structural analysis)
* <<Use-Case-Cluster>>
* <<View-Based-Understanding, View Based Understanding>>


// the detailed description of tha analysis-patterns

include::patterns/analyze/capture-quality-requirements.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/debugging.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/qualitative-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/root-cause-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/software-archeology.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/static-analysis.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/take-what-they-mean.adoc[]

include::patterns/analyze/view-based-understanding.adoc[]
