guide/src/asciidoc/asciidoc-help.adoc, before:

:numbered!:

[appendix]
== Asciidoc Help

To facilitate contributions we summarize the AsciiDoc (respectively AsciiDoctor) features used within this guide.


=== Headings

=== Cross-References and Links::

=== Images and Diagrams::

Including images is quite easy:

----
image::aim42-logo.png[]
----
image::aim42-logo.png[]


=== Lists

----
* first entry
* one more
----

* first entry
* one more


=== Admonitions

Special annotations rendering nicely:

----
NOTE: Admonition paragraphs call attention to special words of advice

WARNING: a warning

CAUTION: be careful

IMPORTANT: must be really worth reading

TIP: maybe some practice report
----

NOTE: Admonition paragraphs call attention to special words of advice

WARNING: a warning

CAUTION: be careful

IMPORTANT: must be really worth reading

TIP: maybe some practice report


----
[TIP]
--
Multi-line admonitions blocks need special treatment: 

they need a block-masquerading (e.g. by "--" at the beginning and end.

The result is rendered nicely.
--
----
renders as follows:

[TIP]
--
Multi-line admonitions blocks need special treatment: 

they need a block-masquerading (e.g. by "--" at the beginning and end.

The result is rendered nicely.
--

=== Files and Directories

Files are included with the "include" directive:

[listing]
  include::asciidoc-help.adoc[]


=== Attributes
Some attributes are useful, e.g.

* `{docdate}` will insert the last modification data (here: {docdate})

Commit message:

* some experiments with new list-style for pattern index * see asciidoc-help for suggestion (will do tomorrow)

guide/src/asciidoc/asciidoc-help.adoc, after:

:numbered!:

[appendix]
== Asciidoc Help

To facilitate contributions we summarize the AsciiDoc (respectively AsciiDoctor) features used within this guide.


=== Headings

=== Cross-References and Links


<<some-anchor,explanation>> creates a link to the explanation of some-anchor.

can use the cross-reference in a list, but not with labelled-list:

. <<some-anchor, pattern name>>  labelled-list with cross-reference does not work
. *<<some-anchor, cross-references>>* need to be boldface-formatted manualy   


[[some-anchor]]
here we explain 'some-anchor' topic...

----
<<some-anchor,explanation>> creates a link to the explanation of some-anchor.

can use the cross-reference in a list, but not with labelled-list:

. <<some-anchor, pattern name>>  labelled-list with cross-reference does not work
. *<<some-anchor, cross-references>>* need to be boldface-formatted manualy   


[[some-anchor]]
here we explain 'some-anchor' topic...
----


=== Images and Diagrams

Including images is quite easy:

----
image::aim42-logo.png[]
----
image::aim42-logo.png[]


=== Lists

----
* first entry
* one more
----

* first entry
* one more


=== Admonitions

Special annotations rendering nicely:

----
NOTE: Admonition paragraphs call attention to special words of advice

WARNING: a warning

CAUTION: be careful

IMPORTANT: must be really worth reading

TIP: maybe some practice report
----

NOTE: Admonition paragraphs call attention to special words of advice

WARNING: a warning

CAUTION: be careful

IMPORTANT: must be really worth reading

TIP: maybe some practice report


----
[TIP]
--
Multi-line admonitions blocks need special treatment: 

they need a block-masquerading (e.g. by "--" at the beginning and end.

The result is rendered nicely.
--
----
renders as follows:

[TIP]
--
Multi-line admonitions blocks need special treatment: 

they need a block-masquerading (e.g. by "--" at the beginning and end.

The result is rendered nicely.
--

=== Files and Directories

Files are included with the "include" directive:

[listing]
  include::asciidoc-help.adoc[]


=== Attributes
Some attributes are useful, e.g.

* `{docdate}` will insert the last modification data (here: {docdate})
