guide/src/asciidoc/bibliography.adoc, before:

:numbered!:

[[bibliography]]
[appendix]
== Bibliography


* [[[arc42]]] arc42 - Resources for Software Architects. Practical template, liberal licence.
Available in a variety of formats, see http://arc42.de[German website] or http://arc42.org[English website].

* [[[Agans-Debugging]]] David J. Agans: Debugging: The 9 Indispensable Rules for Finding Even the Mose 
Elusive Software and Hardware Problems. Amacom Press, 2002. Although most developers take "debugging skills" for granted,
they sometimes spend too much time tracking too little bugs. 

* [[[AIW]]] http://www.sei.cmu.edu/architecture/tools/evaluate/aiw.cfm[Architecture Improvement Workshop]. 
Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.

* [[[Annett-Legacy]]] Robert Annett: Working with Legacy Systems: A practical guide to the real systems we inherit.  http://leanpub.com/WorkingWithLegacySystems[Leanpub Publishing].

* [[[ATAM]]] http://www.sei.cmu.edu/architecture/tools/evaluate/atam.cfm[Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Method]. 
Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.

 
* [[[Berglung-AfferentCoupling]]] Tim Berglund (GitHub) on 
http://de.slideshare.net/jaxlondon2012/complexity-theory-and-software-development-tim-berglund[Complexity Theory and Software Development]. Look at slide 73ff on afferent coupling - and keep that in mind for your own refactorings.

* [[[Bass09]]] Len Bass et.al.: Software Architecture in Practice. Addison-Wesley, 2. Edition 2009.

* [[Bommer-Wartung]] Christoph Bommer, M. Spindler, V. Barr: Softwarewartung: Grundlagen, Management und Wartungstechniken.
(in German) dpunkt Verlag, 2008. Interesting treatment of categories of software systems and their respective need for maintenance and evolution. Authors quote studies from Lehman and Belady from the 1970's.


* [[Brodie-Stonebraker]] Migrating Legacy Systems: Gateway, Interfaces & the Incremental Approach; Morgan Kaufmann 1995.

* [[[Clements09]]] Paul Clements et.al.: Evaluating Software Architecture - Methods and Case Studies. 
Addison-Wesley, 2001. Detailed overview of ATAM (and other evaluation methods.

* [[[Campbell14]]] Ann Campbell et. al: SonarQube in Action. Manning Publications, 2014. Great introduction to 
the flexible, multi-language code-analysis toolkit. 


* [[[Feathers]]] Michael Feathers: Working Effectively with Legacy Code. Prentice Hall, 2005. The author claims "Code without tests is bad code". So true...


* [[[Fowler-Refactoring]]] Martin Fowler: Refactoring. Addision-Wesley. Addision-Wesley, 1999.


* [[[Freemann]]] Steve Freeman, Nat Pryce: Growing Object Oriented Software By Tests. Addison-Wesley, 2010.

* [[[Henney]]] Kevlin Henney: 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know. O'Reilly Media, 2010, ISBN 0596809484, also http://programmer.97things.oreilly.com/wiki/index.php/97_Things_Every_Programmer_Should_Know[available online]
  
* [[[Hunt-Archeology]]] Andy Hunt, Dave Thomas: http://media.pragprog.com/articles/mar_02_archeology.pdf[Software Archeology], IEEE Software, March/April 2002

* [[[Impact-Mapping]]] Gojko Adzic: http://impactmapping.org[Impact Mapping. Making a Big Impact With Software Products and Projects].

* [[[Keller-Migration]]] Wolfgang Keller: http://www.objectarchitects.de/ObjectArchitects/papers/WhitePapers/ZippedPapers/pacman03.pdf[The Bridge to the New Town] - A Legacy System Migration Pattern. EuroPLoP 2000, ISBN 3-87940-775-4


* [[[Lippert-Refactoring]]] M.Lippert, S.Roock: Refactoring in Large Software Projects: 
Performing Complex Restructurings Successfully, Wiley 2006


* [[[Martin-CleanCode]]] Robert Martin: Clean Code - A Handbook of Agile Software Craftmanship. Prentice Hall, 2009.
A detailed writeup of how (object-oriented) code should look like. Lots of things we like.

* [[Mikado]] Ola Elnestam, Daniel Brolund: The Mikado Method. Manning, 2014. Describes a method to _morphing_ software from bad to better state. Quote from the book:
``It helps us visualize, plan, and perform business-value-focused improvements over several iterations and increments of work, without ever having a broken codebase''

* [[[Moyer-Archeology]]] Brian Moyer: http://adm.omg.org/docs/Software_Archeology_4-Mar-2009.pdf[Software Archeology]

* [[[Ogawa-Evolution]]] Michael Ogawa: Software Evolution Storylines. Available as research paper, open-source code and  
online. http://www.michaelogawa.com/research/storylines/[Visualizes interactions between developers in software systems]

* [[[Quality-Requirements]]] 
https://bitbucket.org/arc42/quality-requirements[(Free) Examples of Practical Software Quality Requirements].

* [[[SERIOUS]]] Software Evolution, Refactoring, Improvement of Operational & Usable Systems. 
http://www.hitech-projects.com/euprojects/serious/[ITEA / EUREKA research project]. 
Completed in 2008, holds a fairly large number of deliverables. 

* [[[SERIOUS-Refactoring]]] 
http://www.hitech-projects.com/euprojects/serious/deliverables/public%20deliverables/deliverables%20wp1/D1.3%20Refactoring%20Handbook.pdf[SERIOUS Refactoring Handbook]. 

* [[[SERIOUS-Methods]]] SERIOUS project.
http://www.hitech-projects.com/euprojects/serious/deliverables/public%20deliverables/deliverables%20wp3/D3.3%20Overview%20and%20evaluation%20of%20design%20and%20refactoring%20methods.pdf[Overview and evaluation of design and refactoring methods]

* [[[Software-Evolution]]] http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1002/(ISSN)2047-7481[Journal of Software: Evolution and Process]. Academic journal on software evolution and maintenance.

* [[[SonarQube]]] SonarQube is an http://sonarqube.org[free and open platform to measure manage code quality], lots of plugins for 
a variety of programming languages, plugins for different metrics and checks. SonarQube can track results over time - showing the history of code quality for software systems.

* [[[Spolsky-NeverRewrite]]] Joel Spolsky: http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/fog0000000069.html[Things You Should Never Do, Part-I]

Commit message:

Started work on Invariants and Zombies (issue #34)
  Just set up the structure, exted the biography and filled in the short description.

guide/src/asciidoc/bibliography.adoc, after:

:numbered!:

[[bibliography]]
[appendix]
== Bibliography

* [[[AntiPatterns]]] William J. Brown: AntiPatterns: Refactoring Software,
 Architecture and Projects in Crisis, John Wiley & Sons, 1998 -- a tried and
 true work on things that tend to go wrong in software development and other
 projects.

* [[[arc42]]] arc42 - Resources for Software Architects. Practical template, liberal licence.
Available in a variety of formats, see http://arc42.de[German website] or http://arc42.org[English website].

* [[[Agans-Debugging]]] David J. Agans: Debugging: The 9 Indispensable Rules for Finding Even the Mose 
Elusive Software and Hardware Problems. Amacom Press, 2002. Although most developers take "debugging skills" for granted,
they sometimes spend too much time tracking too little bugs. 

* [[[AIW]]] http://www.sei.cmu.edu/architecture/tools/evaluate/aiw.cfm[Architecture Improvement Workshop]. 
Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.

* [[[Annett-Legacy]]] Robert Annett: Working with Legacy Systems: A practical guide to the real systems we inherit.  http://leanpub.com/WorkingWithLegacySystems[Leanpub Publishing].

* [[[ATAM]]] http://www.sei.cmu.edu/architecture/tools/evaluate/atam.cfm[Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Method]. 
Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.

 
* [[[Berglung-AfferentCoupling]]] Tim Berglund (GitHub) on 
http://de.slideshare.net/jaxlondon2012/complexity-theory-and-software-development-tim-berglund[Complexity Theory and Software Development]. Look at slide 73ff on afferent coupling - and keep that in mind for your own refactorings.

* [[[Bass09]]] Len Bass et.al.: Software Architecture in Practice. Addison-Wesley, 2. Edition 2009.

* [[Bommer-Wartung]] Christoph Bommer, M. Spindler, V. Barr: Softwarewartung: Grundlagen, Management und Wartungstechniken.
(in German) dpunkt Verlag, 2008. Interesting treatment of categories of software systems and their respective need for maintenance and evolution. Authors quote studies from Lehman and Belady from the 1970's.


* [[Brodie-Stonebraker]] Migrating Legacy Systems: Gateway, Interfaces & the Incremental Approach; Morgan Kaufmann 1995.

* [[[Clements09]]] Paul Clements et.al.: Evaluating Software Architecture - Methods and Case Studies. 
Addison-Wesley, 2001. Detailed overview of ATAM (and other evaluation methods.

* [[[Campbell14]]] Ann Campbell et. al: SonarQube in Action. Manning Publications, 2014. Great introduction to 
the flexible, multi-language code-analysis toolkit. 


* [[[Feathers]]] Michael Feathers: Working Effectively with Legacy Code. Prentice Hall, 2005. The author claims "Code without tests is bad code". So true...


* [[[Fowler-Refactoring]]] Martin Fowler: Refactoring. Addision-Wesley. Addision-Wesley, 1999.


* [[[Freemann]]] Steve Freeman, Nat Pryce: Growing Object Oriented Software By Tests. Addison-Wesley, 2010.

* [[[Henney]]] Kevlin Henney: 97 Things Every Programmer Should Know. O'Reilly Media, 2010, ISBN 0596809484, also http://programmer.97things.oreilly.com/wiki/index.php/97_Things_Every_Programmer_Should_Know[available online]
  
* [[[Hunt-Archeology]]] Andy Hunt, Dave Thomas: http://media.pragprog.com/articles/mar_02_archeology.pdf[Software Archeology], IEEE Software, March/April 2002

* [[[Impact-Mapping]]] Gojko Adzic: http://impactmapping.org[Impact Mapping. Making a Big Impact With Software Products and Projects].

* [[[Keller-Migration]]] Wolfgang Keller: http://www.objectarchitects.de/ObjectArchitects/papers/WhitePapers/ZippedPapers/pacman03.pdf[The Bridge to the New Town] - A Legacy System Migration Pattern. EuroPLoP 2000, ISBN 3-87940-775-4


* [[[Lippert-Refactoring]]] M.Lippert, S.Roock: Refactoring in Large Software Projects: 
Performing Complex Restructurings Successfully, Wiley 2006


* [[[Martin-CleanCode]]] Robert Martin: Clean Code - A Handbook of Agile Software Craftmanship. Prentice Hall, 2009.
A detailed writeup of how (object-oriented) code should look like. Lots of things we like.

* [[Mikado]] Ola Elnestam, Daniel Brolund: The Mikado Method. Manning, 2014. Describes a method to _morphing_ software from bad to better state. Quote from the book:
``It helps us visualize, plan, and perform business-value-focused improvements over several iterations and increments of work, without ever having a broken codebase''

* [[[Moyer-Archeology]]] Brian Moyer: http://adm.omg.org/docs/Software_Archeology_4-Mar-2009.pdf[Software Archeology]

* [[[Ogawa-Evolution]]] Michael Ogawa: Software Evolution Storylines. Available as research paper, open-source code and  
online. http://www.michaelogawa.com/research/storylines/[Visualizes interactions between developers in software systems]

* [[[Quality-Requirements]]] 
https://bitbucket.org/arc42/quality-requirements[(Free) Examples of Practical Software Quality Requirements].

* [[[SERIOUS]]] Software Evolution, Refactoring, Improvement of Operational & Usable Systems. 
http://www.hitech-projects.com/euprojects/serious/[ITEA / EUREKA research project]. 
Completed in 2008, holds a fairly large number of deliverables. 

* [[[SERIOUS-Refactoring]]] 
http://www.hitech-projects.com/euprojects/serious/deliverables/public%20deliverables/deliverables%20wp1/D1.3%20Refactoring%20Handbook.pdf[SERIOUS Refactoring Handbook]. 

* [[[SERIOUS-Methods]]] SERIOUS project.
http://www.hitech-projects.com/euprojects/serious/deliverables/public%20deliverables/deliverables%20wp3/D3.3%20Overview%20and%20evaluation%20of%20design%20and%20refactoring%20methods.pdf[Overview and evaluation of design and refactoring methods]

* [[[Software-Evolution]]] http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1002/(ISSN)2047-7481[Journal of Software: Evolution and Process]. Academic journal on software evolution and maintenance.

* [[[SonarQube]]] SonarQube is an http://sonarqube.org[free and open platform to measure manage code quality], lots of plugins for 
a variety of programming languages, plugins for different metrics and checks. SonarQube can track results over time - showing the history of code quality for software systems.

* [[[Spolsky-NeverRewrite]]] Joel Spolsky: http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/fog0000000069.html[Things You Should Never Do, Part-I]
