guide/src/asciidoc/crosscutting.adoc, before:

:linkattrs:

[[Crosscutting]]
== Cross-Cutting Practices and Patterns

. Start with collecting problems.
. Evaluate those, determine priorities and _values_. This ensures you later solve _important_ and _relevant_ problems.
. Aligned with your problems, keep a list of potential improvements.

image::from-problem-to-improvement.jpg["from problem to improvement", title="From problem to solutions", id="problem-to-solution"]


[[collect-problems]]
=== [pattern]#Collect Problems#
You should constantly watch out for problems, issues and risks.
Keep a list of those problems. Regularly match those to your <<collect-opportunities-for-improvement, collection of possible remedies>>.

It's difficult to decide how much formalism to apply in collecting problems: Sometimes a wiki-page might suffice, for other systems a full-blown issue-tracker can be useful. 

As always: documentation is only valuable if it can be found and searched - which makes electronic approaches more viable.

[[collect-opportunities-for-improvement]]
=== [pattern]#Collect Opportunities for Improvement#
You should look for improvement opportunities, remedies, measures, tactics and strategies in all of the aim42-phases.



[[figure-collect-remedies]]
image::collect-remedies.png["collect remedies", title="Collect Remedies in All Phases"]


include::patterns/crosscutting/expect-denial.adoc[]

[[Explicit-Assumption]]
=== [pattern]#Explicit Assumption#
TODO

Also known as _educated guess_.



[[Fail-Fast]]
=== [pattern]#Fail Fast#
The later a lack of quality is identified the higher are the costs to fix it. Continuously evaluate the quality of work artifacts and immediately take countermeasures or pull the plug as early as possible. Similar to <<Fast-Feedback>>.

Suitable methods to identify such situations are:

* Code reviews
* Architecture reviews
* Peer reviews
* Testing in early stages


[[Fast-Feedback]]
=== [pattern]#Fast Feedback#
TODO

See also <<Fail-Fast>>.


[[improvement-backlog]]
=== [pattern]#Improvement Backlog#
Keep a public, written backlog of possible improvements, remedies, tactics or strategies.

* Revise this backlog in regular intervalls.
* Define the _owner role_ for this backlog, similar to the _product owner_ in Scrum.
* Enhance the backlog with information from the <<evaluation>> phase, like cost, effort or risk.


[[figure-improvement-backlog]]
image::improvement-backlog.jpg["improvement backlog", title="Improvement Backlog"]



include::patterns/crosscutting/slide-or-write.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/traceability.adoc[]

Commit message:

Added section "Pattern and Practices for Cross-Cutting Concerns"
Added section "Pattern and Practices for Cross-Cutting Concerns".

Changed order of pattern to ensure  alphabetical order.

guide/src/asciidoc/crosscutting.adoc, after:

:linkattrs:

[[Crosscutting]]
== Cross-Cutting Practices and Patterns

. Start with collecting problems.
. Evaluate those, determine priorities and _values_. This ensures you later solve _important_ and _relevant_ problems.
. Aligned with your problems, keep a list of potential improvements.

image::from-problem-to-improvement.jpg["from problem to improvement", title="From problem to solutions", id="problem-to-solution"]


=== Pattern and Practices for Cross-Cutting Concerns
(given in alphabetical order)

* <<collect-opportunities-for-improvement>>
* <<collect-problems>>
* <<Expect-Denial>>
* <<Explicit-Assumption>>
* <<Fail-Fast>>
* <<Fast-Feedback>>
* <<improvement-backlog>>
* <<Slide-Or-Write>>
* <<Traceability>>


[[collect-opportunities-for-improvement]]
=== [pattern]#Collect Opportunities for Improvement#
You should look for improvement opportunities, remedies, measures, tactics and strategies in all of the aim42-phases.



[[figure-collect-remedies]]
image::collect-remedies.png["collect remedies", title="Collect Remedies in All Phases"]


[[collect-problems]]
=== [pattern]#Collect Problems#
You should constantly watch out for problems, issues and risks.
Keep a list of those problems. Regularly match those to your <<collect-opportunities-for-improvement, collection of possible remedies>>.

It's difficult to decide how much formalism to apply in collecting problems: Sometimes a wiki-page might suffice, for other systems a full-blown issue-tracker can be useful. 

As always: documentation is only valuable if it can be found and searched - which makes electronic approaches more viable.


include::patterns/crosscutting/expect-denial.adoc[]


[[Explicit-Assumption]]
=== [pattern]#Explicit Assumption#
TODO

Also known as _educated guess_.



[[Fail-Fast]]
=== [pattern]#Fail Fast#
The later a lack of quality is identified the higher are the costs to fix it. Continuously evaluate the quality of work artifacts and immediately take countermeasures or pull the plug as early as possible. Similar to <<Fast-Feedback>>.

Suitable methods to identify such situations are:

* Code reviews
* Architecture reviews
* Peer reviews
* Testing in early stages


[[Fast-Feedback]]
=== [pattern]#Fast Feedback#
TODO

See also <<Fail-Fast>>.


[[improvement-backlog]]
=== [pattern]#Improvement Backlog#
Keep a public, written backlog of possible improvements, remedies, tactics or strategies.

* Revise this backlog in regular intervalls.
* Define the _owner role_ for this backlog, similar to the _product owner_ in Scrum.
* Enhance the backlog with information from the <<evaluation>> phase, like cost, effort or risk.


[[figure-improvement-backlog]]
image::improvement-backlog.jpg["improvement backlog", title="Improvement Backlog"]


include::patterns/crosscutting/slide-or-write.adoc[]

include::patterns/crosscutting/traceability.adoc[]
