guide/src/asciidoc/improve.adoc, before:


[[Improve]]
== Improve


=== Goals

// this "plan" stuff might be a phase of its own?
. Plan and coordinate measures and remedies to eliminate problems and issues found during analysis.

. Apply the remedies

* Change code, structures, concepts or processes to achieve better software,
* reduce costs and/or technical debt,
* Eliminate issues found during analysis phase,
* Optimize quality attributes (like performance, maintainability, security),
* Optimize operation and administration processes, effort and cost.


==== Refactoring Source Code
One important part of improving systems is refactoring, as initially described by <<Fowler-Refactoring>>.

In our opinion, several refactoring patterns are especially important:

* <<Handle If-Else-Chains>>: eliminate nested if-then-else blocks, so that code becomes more understandable.


=== Patterns and Practices for Improvement
(given in alphabetical order)

* <<Anticorruption-Layer>>
* <<Assertions>>
* <<Automated-Tests>>
* <<Branch-For-Improvement>>
* <<Extract-Reusable-Component>>
* <<Facade>>
* <<Group-Improvement-Actions>>
* <<Handle-If-Else-Chains>>
* <<Impact-Analysis>>
* <<Improve-Code-Layout>>
* <<Introduce-Boy-Scout-Rule>>
* <<interface-segregation-principle, Interface Segregation Principle>>
* <<Isolate-Changes>>
* <<Keep-Data-Toss-Code>>
* <<Never-Change-Running-System>>
* <<Quality-Driven-Software-Architecture>>
* <<Refactoring>>
* <<Refactoring-Plan>>
* <<Remove-Nested-Control-Structures>>
* <<Sample-For-Improvement>>
* <<Schedule-Work>>
* <<Untangle-Code>>
* <<Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies>>


include::patterns/improve/introduce-boy-scout-rule.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/anticorruption-layer.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/facade.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/interface-segregation-principle.adoc[]

Commit message:

* added images for phases (eval and improve) * checked phase-goals (to close https://github.com/aim42/aim42/issues/18)

guide/src/asciidoc/improve.adoc, after:


[[Improve]]
== Improve

image::improve.jpg["improve-phase", title="Improve-Phase"]

=== Goals

. Plan and coordinate measures and remedies to eliminate problems and issues found during <<Analyze, analysis>>.

. Apply the remedies

* Change code, structures, concepts or processes to achieve better software,
* reduce costs and/or technical debt,
* Eliminate issues found during analysis phase,
* Optimize quality attributes (like performance, maintainability, security),
* Optimize operation and administration processes, effort and cost.


==== Refactoring Source Code
One important part of improving systems is refactoring, as initially described by <<Fowler-Refactoring>>.

In our opinion, several refactoring patterns are especially important:

* <<Handle If-Else-Chains>>: eliminate nested if-then-else blocks, so that code becomes more understandable.


=== Patterns and Practices for Improvement
(given in alphabetical order)

* <<Anticorruption-Layer>>
* <<Assertions>>
* <<Automated-Tests>>
* <<Branch-For-Improvement>>
* <<Extract-Reusable-Component>>
* <<Facade>>
* <<Group-Improvement-Actions>>
* <<Handle-If-Else-Chains>>
* <<Impact-Analysis>>
* <<Improve-Code-Layout>>
* <<Introduce-Boy-Scout-Rule>>
* <<interface-segregation-principle, Interface Segregation Principle>>
* <<Isolate-Changes>>
* <<Keep-Data-Toss-Code>>
* <<Never-Change-Running-System>>
* <<Quality-Driven-Software-Architecture>>
* <<Refactoring>>
* <<Refactoring-Plan>>
* <<Remove-Nested-Control-Structures>>
* <<Sample-For-Improvement>>
* <<Schedule-Work>>
* <<Untangle-Code>>
* <<Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies>>


include::patterns/improve/introduce-boy-scout-rule.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/Use-Invariants-To-Kill-Zombies.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/anticorruption-layer.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/facade.adoc[]
include::patterns/improve/interface-segregation-principle.adoc[]
