src/main/asciidoc/appendices/asciidoc-help.adoc, before:

:numbered!:
:linkattrs:

[appendix]
== Asciidoc Help

To facilitate contributions we summarize the AsciiDoc (respectively AsciiDoctor) features used within this guide.

[TIP]
--
We found the following information especially helpful for learning asciidoc: 

* http://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-writers-guide[AsciiDoctor Writers Guide]
* Chrome-Add-In for http://asciidoctor.org/news/2013/09/18/introducing-asciidoctor-js-live-preview/[Live-preview]: 
--


=== Headings

Headings are just headings as described in the AsciiDoctor's Manual entry on
**http://asciidoctor.org/docs/user-manual/#sections[ sections]**. The important
thing to keep in mind is the fact that AsciiDoctor actually treats headings
_semantically_. This means that a level 2 section should come within a section 1
section and be followed by a level three section, _not_ by a level four section.

Otherwise there should be a compile warning in the gradle build like this

----
:asciidoctor
asciidoctor: WARNING: appendices/asciidoc-help.adoc: line 18: section title out of sequence: expected level 2, got level 3
----

and we try to avoid these.

=== Cross-References


<<some-anchor,explanation>> creates a link to the explanation of some-anchor.

can use the cross-reference in a list, but not with labelled-list:

. <<some-anchor, pattern name>>  labelled-list with cross-reference does not work
. *<<some-anchor, cross-references>>* need to be boldface-formatted manualy   


=== (external) Links
----
https://github.com/aim42/aim42/issues/20[an external resource]
----

https://github.com/aim42/aim42/issues/20[an external resource]


Link to files / artifacts in new browser window/tab:

----
link:./docs/readme-directory.md[readme]
----

link:./docs/readme-directory.md[readme]

=== Anchor

[[some-anchor]]
here we explain 'some-anchor' topic...

----
<<some-anchor,explanation>> creates a link to the explanation of some-anchor.

can use the cross-reference in a list, but not with labelled-list:

. <<some-anchor, pattern name>>  labelled-list with cross-reference does not work
. *<<some-anchor, cross-references>>* need to be boldface-formatted manualy   


[[some-anchor]]
here we explain 'some-anchor' topic...
----


=== Images and Diagrams

Including images is quite easy:

----
[[caption-example]]
image::aim42-logo.png["alternate-text", title="caption-example"]
----
[[caption-example]]
image::aim42-logo.png["alternate-text", title="caption-example"]


You can even reference these images, like see figure <<caption-example>>:

----
...see figure <<caption-example>>
----

I currently have no clue how to reference figure-numbers (their counter), though...


=== Lists

----
* first entry
* one more
----

* first entry
* one more


=== Admonitions

Special annotations rendering nicely:

----
NOTE: Admonition paragraphs call attention to special words of advice

WARNING: a warning

CAUTION: be careful

IMPORTANT: must be really worth reading

TIP: maybe some practice report
----

NOTE: Admonition paragraphs call attention to special words of advice

WARNING: a warning

CAUTION: be careful

IMPORTANT: must be really worth reading

TIP: maybe some practice report


----
[TIP]
--
Multi-line admonitions blocks need special treatment: 

they need a block-masquerading (e.g. by "--" at the beginning and end.

The result is rendered nicely.
--
----
renders as follows:

[TIP]
--
Multi-line admonitions blocks need special treatment: 

they need a block-masquerading (e.g. by "--" at the beginning and end.

The result is rendered nicely.
--

=== Files and Directories

Files are included with the "include" directive:

[listing]
  include::asciidoc-help.adoc[]


=== Attributes
Some attributes are useful, e.g.
----
{docdate}
----
will insert the last modification data (here: {docdate})

=== Footnotes
In case you need a footnote - that's easy too:
----
A statement.footnote:[the text of this footnote, usually rendered at the end of the document.]
----

=== Typesetting
Sometimes it can be useful to write [small]#smaller text#.

----
... useful to write [small]#smaller text#.
----

Commit message:

updated asciidoc-help (not finished!)

src/main/asciidoc/appendices/asciidoc-help.adoc, after:

:numbered!:
:linkattrs:

[appendix]
== Asciidoc Help

To facilitate contributions we summarize the AsciiDoc (respectively AsciiDoctor) features used within this guide.

[TIP]
--
We found the following information especially helpful for learning and writing AsciiDoc

* http://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-writers-guide[AsciiDoctor Writers Guide]
* Chrome-Add-In for http://asciidoctor.org/news/2013/09/18/introducing-asciidoctor-js-live-preview/[Live-preview]
* https://atom.io/packages/asciidoc-preview[AsciiDoc Preview] for Atom editor
*
--


=== Headings

Headings are just headings as described in the AsciiDoctor's Manual entry on
**http://asciidoctor.org/docs/user-manual/#sections[ sections]**. The important
thing to keep in mind is the fact that AsciiDoctor actually treats headings
_semantically_. This means that a level 2 section should come within a section 1
section and be followed by a level three section, _not_ by a level four section.

Otherwise there should be a compile warning in the gradle build like this

----
:asciidoctor
asciidoctor: WARNING: appendices/asciidoc-help.adoc: line 18: section title out of sequence: expected level 2, got level 3
----

and we try to avoid these.

=== Cross-References

<<some-anchor,explanation>> creates a link to the explanation of some-anchor:

----
<<some-anchor,explanation>> creates a link to the explanation of some-anchor.
----



You can use the cross-reference in a list, but not with labelled-list:

. <<some-anchor, pattern name>>  labeled-list with cross-reference does not work
. *<<some-anchor, cross-references>>* need to be boldface-formatted manually


=== (external) Links
----
https://github.com/aim42/aim42/issues/20[an external resource]
----

https://github.com/aim42/aim42/issues/20[an external resource]


Link to files / artifacts in new browser window/tab:

----
link:./docs/readme-directory.md[readme]
----

link:./docs/readme-directory.md[readme]

=== Anchor

[[some-anchor]]
here we explain 'some-anchor' topic...

----
<<some-anchor,explanation>> creates a link to the explanation of some-anchor.

can use the cross-reference in a list, but not with labelled-list:

. <<some-anchor, pattern name>>  labelled-list with cross-reference does not work
. *<<some-anchor, cross-references>>* need to be boldface-formatted manualy


[[some-anchor]]
here we explain 'some-anchor' topic...
----


=== Images and Diagrams

Including images is quite easy:

----
[[caption-example]]
image::aim42-logo.png["alternate-text", title="caption-example"]
----
[[caption-example]]
image::aim42-logo.png["alternate-text", title="caption-example"]


You can even reference these images, like see figure <<caption-example>>:

----
...see figure <<caption-example>>
----

I currently have no clue how to reference figure-numbers (their counter), though...


=== Lists

----
* first entry
* one more
----

* first entry
* one more


=== Admonitions

Special annotations rendering nicely:

----
NOTE: Admonition paragraphs call attention to special words of advice

WARNING: a warning

CAUTION: be careful

IMPORTANT: must be really worth reading

TIP: maybe some practice report
----

NOTE: Admonition paragraphs call attention to special words of advice

WARNING: a warning

CAUTION: be careful

IMPORTANT: must be really worth reading

TIP: maybe some practice report


----
[TIP]
--
Multi-line admonitions blocks need special treatment:

they need a block-masquerading (e.g. by "--" at the beginning and end.

The result is rendered nicely.
--
----
renders as follows:

[TIP]
--
Multi-line admonitions blocks need special treatment:

they need a block-masquerading (e.g. by "--" at the beginning and end.

The result is rendered nicely.
--

=== Files and Directories

Files are included with the "include" directive:

[listing]
  include::asciidoc-help.adoc[]


=== Attributes
Some attributes are useful, e.g.
----
{docdate}
----
will insert the last modification data (here: {docdate})

=== Footnotes
In case you need a footnote - that's easy too:
----
A statement.footnote:[the text of this footnote, usually rendered at the end of the document.]
----


=== Typesetting
Sometimes it can be useful to write [small]#smaller text#.

----
... useful to write [small]#smaller text#.
----
